Attached detached lite (#390)
ResearchObject/ro-crate: docs/_specification/1.2-DRAFT/structure.md

## Types of RO-Crate

> An _RO-Crate Metadata Document_ is typically used or processed in one of three main ways:

Author: I have reworked this a bit, but without reverting to the previous wording. Unless we actually add a `conformsTo` or similar to distinguish attached and detached (which I think at this point is not a good idea) then I think that defining the requirements for the two types (contexts of processing) is a much better way to go. This avoids tool builders having to do inference on what is intended and I think it's easily handled by the distinction between opening a directory or package such a .zip or .tar vs opening a file, a URI, a string or an object parsed from JSON.

1.  An _Attached  RO-Crate Package_ that defines an on-disk collection of data:
  - It is defined within a file-system-like service as a directory (known as the _RO-Crate Root_) with the RO-Crate Metadata Document saved in a file-like entity with a file name of `ro-crate-metadata.json`.
  - References to files and directories in the RO-Crate Metadata Document are present in the RO-Crate or available online as [Web-based Data Entities](data-entities.html#web-based-data-entities).
2.  A _Detached RO-Crate Package_:
    - Is defined by a stand alone RO-Crate metadata document which may be stored in a file or distributed via an API.

>     - If stored in a file, known as a _Detached RO-Crate Metadata File_, the filename SHOULD be `${slug}-ro-crate-metadata.json` where the variable `$slug` is a human readable version of the dataset's ID or name, to signal that the document should be interpreted as part of an _Attached RO-Crate Data Package_.

Author: It should not affect finding the RO Crate Metadata description as that is ALWAYS ro-crate-metadata.json in all cases -- it is essentially a magic string (this is already noted that if you get a crate over an API).

The intention of the proposed changes here is that when you are dealing with a Detached crate an algorithm should never have to find it, it will be passed in directly either as a file, a string or a URI to some endpoint. The point of recommending this slug is twofold - firstly to distinguish files people might have in their downloads -- ATM you end up with a lot of ro-crate-metadata.json files and secondly, to STOP detached crates from being accidentally treated as Attached RO-Crate Packages.

If this makes sense then I will look at making it clearer in the spec.

>     - If stored in a file, known as a _Detached RO-Crate Metadata File_, the filename SHOULD be `${slug}-ro-crate-metadata.json` where the variable `$slug` is a human readable version of the dataset's ID or name, to signal that the document should be interpreted as part of an _Attached RO-Crate Data Package_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If stored in a file, known as a _Detached RO-Crate Metadata File_, the filename SHOULD be `${slug}-ro-crate-metadata.json` where the variable `$slug` is a human readable version of the dataset's ID or name, to signal that the document should be interpreted as part of a _Detached RO-Crate Data Package_.
```

>     - If stored in a file, known as a _Detached RO-Crate Metadata File_, the filename SHOULD be `${slug}-ro-crate-metadata.json` where the variable `$slug` is a human readable version of the dataset's ID or name, to signal that the document should be interpreted as part of an _Attached RO-Crate Data Package_.

Author: I reworded it

### Payload files and directories 

These are the actual files and directories that make up the **payload** of the dataset being described in an _Attached  RO-Crate Package_.

The base RO-Crate specification makes no assumptions about the presence of any specific files or folders beyond the reserved RO-Crate files described above. 

Payload files may appear directly in the _RO-Crate Root_ alongside the _RO-Crate Metadata File_, and/or appear in sub-directories of the _RO-Crate Root_. Each file and directory MAY be represented as [Data Entities](data-entities) in the _RO-Crate Metadata File_.

An RO-Crate may also contain [Web-based Data Entities](data-entities.html#web-based-data-entities) that are not present as part of the payload and referenced using absolute URIs. These may require additional preservation measures.

> {% include callout.html type="tip" content="An RO-Crate [packaged with BagIt](appendix/implementation-notes#adding-ro-crate-to-bagit) may be [referencing external files](appendix/implementation-notes#referencing-external-files) which are not present in the _RO-Crate Root_ hierarchy until the BagIt has been _completed_. This method can be used for files that are large, require authentication or otherwise inconvenient to transfer with the RO-Crate, but which should nevertheless still be considered part of the _payload_.". RO-Crate has a similar mechanism for referencing such external files using both an `@id` to reference a local path and [contentUrl]  property to indicate a source for that data. See the section on [File Data Entities](data-entities#file-data-entity) %}

Reviewer 2: This should fix the CI failure - the quotes need to encompass the whole tip

```suggestion
{% include callout.html type="tip" content="An RO-Crate [packaged with BagIt](appendix/implementation-notes#adding-ro-crate-to-bagit) may be [referencing external files](appendix/implementation-notes#referencing-external-files) which are not present in the _RO-Crate Root_ hierarchy until the BagIt has been _completed_. This method can be used for files that are large, require authentication or otherwise inconvenient to transfer with the RO-Crate, but which should nevertheless still be considered part of the _payload_. RO-Crate has a similar mechanism for referencing such external files using both an `@id` to reference a local path and [contentUrl]  property to indicate a source for that data. See the section on [File Data Entities](data-entities#file-data-entity)." %}
```

> {% include callout.html type="tip" content="An RO-Crate [packaged with BagIt](appendix/implementation-notes#adding-ro-crate-to-bagit) may be [referencing external files](appendix/implementation-notes#referencing-external-files) which are not present in the _RO-Crate Root_ hierarchy until the BagIt has been _completed_. This method can be used for files that are large, require authentication or otherwise inconvenient to transfer with the RO-Crate, but which should nevertheless still be considered part of the _payload_.". RO-Crate 1.2 has a similar mechanism for referencing such external files using both an `@id` to reference a local path and [contentUrl]  property to indicate an source for that data. See the section on [File Data Entities](data-entities#file-data-entity) %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include callout.html type="tip" content="An RO-Crate [packaged with BagIt](appendix/implementation-notes#adding-ro-crate-to-bagit) may be [referencing external files](appendix/implementation-notes#referencing-external-files) which are not present in the _RO-Crate Root_ hierarchy until the BagIt has been _completed_. This method can be used for files that are large, require authentication or otherwise inconvenient to transfer with the RO-Crate, but which should nevertheless still be considered part of the _payload_.". RO-Crate has a similar mechanism for referencing such external files using both an `@id` to reference a local path and [contentUrl]  property to indicate a source for that data. See the section on [File Data Entities](data-entities#file-data-entity) %}
```

The intention is that RO-Crates can work well with a variety of archive file formats, e.g. tar, zip, etc., and approaches to capturing file manifests and file fixity, such as [BagIt], [OCFL] and [git] (see also appendix [Combining with other packaging schemes](appendix/implementation-notes#combining-with-other-packaging-schemes)). An RO-Crate can also be hosted on the web or mainly refer to web resources, although extra care to ensure persistence and consistency should be taken for archiving such RO-Crates.

## Detached RO-Crate Package

A _Detached RO-Crate Package_ is an RO-Crate, defined in an _RO-Crate Metadata Document_ without a defined root directory, where the _RO-Crate Metadata Document_ content is accessed independently (e.g. as part of a programmatic API). 

Unlike an  _Attached  RO-Crate Package_ a _Detached RO-Crate Package_ is not processed in a file-system context and thus does not carry a data _payload_ in the same sense, but may reference data deposited separately, or purely reference [contextual entities](contextual-entities). 

> In a _Detached RO-Crate Package_ the [root data entity](root-data-entity) SHOULD have an `@id` which is a URL that resolves to the _RO-Crate Metadata Document_.

Reviewer: Why would the `@id` of the root data entity resolve to the metadata document? They are two separate entities with different ids.

Author: If you have a detached crate then in many cases that will have some kind of online home at an API or a website - this is saying the the @id should point at that so it should say something like. 

In a _Detached RO-Crate Package_ the [root data entity](root-data-entity) SHOULD have an `@id` which is a URL that resolves to an online source for the _RO-Crate Metadata Document_ which may be a on the web or available over an API.

Does that make sense to you @simleo ?

Reviewer: I guess I'm heavily influenced by the pre-1.2 mindset. So in a detached crate the metadata file descriptor will always have the "magic" string `ro-crate-metadata.json` as `@id`, while the root data entity's `@id` will (possibly) point to a resource where the RO-Crate metadata can actually be retrieved, right? I think changing "SHOULD have an `@id` which is a URL" to "SHOULD have an `@id` which is an absolute URL" would help make things clearer.

Reviewer 3: +1, better be clearer in this case, although strictly speaking "URLs" are always absolute, otherwise they are "URL references"

> Any [data entities](data-entities) in a _Detached RO-Crate Package Package_ are assumed to be [Web-based Data Entities](data-entities.html#web-based-data-entities). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any [data entities](data-entities) in a _Detached RO-Crate Package Package_ MUST be [Web-based Data Entities](data-entities.html#web-based-data-entities). 
```

Unlike an  _Attached  RO-Crate Package_ a _Detached RO-Crate Package_ is not processed in a file-system context and thus does not carry a data _payload_ in the same sense, but may reference data deposited separately, or purely reference [contextual entities](contextual-entities). 

> In a _Detached RO-Crate Package_ the [root data entity](root-data-entity) SHOULD have an @id which is an absolute URL if it is available online. If it is not yet, or will never be available online then @id may be any valid URI - including `./`.

Author: If people don't have the resources or desire to put something online, or to pre-allocate a URL in a repository, add it to the crate then upload then we should not expect them to make up a URL - this is a fallback option which will be compatible with the existing default in tooling.
